So we talked about local properties.
In this lecture,
we'll cover a global property based
method of [INAUDIBLE] finding.
The specific property we focus on,
is called modularity.
It tries to estimate
the quality of clusters of
communities in the [INAUDIBLE].
The intuition is as follows.
If we consider the edges in a group and
try to see whether it's different
from what you'd see if the edges
were assigned randomly with
some probability distribution.
If there is a community, there will be
more edges than would happen at random.
If there is no community in some part
of the graph, the number of edges in
that part will either be close to
the random case or even lower than that.
The modularity measure thus estimates
the quality of the clusters in
the graph by evaluating this difference of
the actual minus the random edge fraction.
So this is the mathematical
formulation of what I just described.
The adjacency matrix, A,
gives us the actual edges.
The Pij provides a probability
of a random edge.
The m in the denominator gives
us the fractional edges.
And the delta function's
task is to evaluate if i and
j should be in the same cluster.
If they are,
the contribution will be added to Q,
the quality metric,
which is multi-layered.
Well, we have not defined what
the probability model looks like.
There are many ways to figure
out what Pij should look like.
One simple model says, that the chance
that there is an edge between nodes i and
j, is proportional to the degree of
node i times the degree of node j.
That means if nodes i and
j are already well connected, there is
a high chance that they share an edge.
So if you're a mathematical person,
you might be thinking, okay,
let's find clusters in the graph so
that Q is maximum and then we're done.
Well sadly, maximizing Q is very hard.
So we need to find
an approximate solution.
So we will illustrate a very
popular method of finding this
modularity based community detection.
Well, the best way to describe
this is through a YouTube video.
That's the URL.
Now, the next slide and
the following slide,
describes it, but
I think it's better to explain the method
through screenshots off
the video as it happens.
We will show you some
snapshots of this video.
There are 309 nodes in this graph.
Initially, they all have different colors.
That is,
they belong to different communities.
This screenshot shows the graph at
iteration 144 of the algorithm.
The number of communities now is 286.
The chart on the right side plots time on
the x-axis and modularity on the y-axis.
As you see,
the modularity's on the rights.
Roughly, at each iteration,
the system is trying to change the color
of a node to that of its neighbors.
But it actually changes the color
only if the modularity value of
the whole graph changes as
a result of that color change.
After a few more iterations,
the number of communities has become 241.
The three arrows show some parts of the
graph where the nodes have changed colors.
Modularity is on the rise.
After 1,437 iterations, the modularity
of the graph is still going up.
Now, there are 113 communities.
The errors show some new areas where
the neighboring nodes have the same color.
At 1,842 iterations,
the modulary gains slows down.
Meanwhile, the number of
communities have reduced to 75.
At 4,179 iterations, the modularity
growth has started becoming flat.
But in the meantime, the number of colors,
that is communities, has reduced to 48.
At around 5,196 iterations, the algorithm
decides that there is not enough
reduction in the number of communities,
which is reduced to only 45 in
the last 1,000 iterations or so.
Now it collapses each community that
is clustered to a single node, and
creates a cluster to cluster edges.
The orange box,
an arrow shows this contraction.
Now compared to the previous slide,
this collapsing or
contraction of the plastic creates
a skeleton of the original draft.
Now the algorithm starts again
with this reduced graph.
You will find many graph
analysis software,
where you can run the Louvain
method of community detection.
[INAUDIBLE].
I took my Linked-in network,
which has me at the center, and
all my connections as nodes.
If two of my contacts are also
connected in Linked-in,
there is an edge between them.
This kind of mean-centric network
is often called an ego network.
When I [INAUDIBLE] the community direction
algorithm here, I found six communities,
with one set of parameters and
seven communities with another.
I could clearly see my
connections in San Diego.
My connections in my professional network,
my friends in India, and so forth.
There's always one false community,
which stands for
others, nodes that do not clearly
belong to any specific group.
Perhaps more interesting and
important than the static
analysis of communities is to track
communities over a length of time.
And determine how they evolve and why.
There are six large
categories of evolution steps
that can happen within a community.
A community like a new
Facebook group can be born.
A community, like a group of
people who gathered for an event,
would dissolve because the event and
the mutual interest around it has ended.
A community can grow because the members
rally around a common cause.
Typically, new cross-community
edges start getting
formed before the communities
actually merge.
The communities can
shrink like my book club.
Where do you see this in real life?
Well, how about company mergers?
Surely enough, the [INAUDIBLE] results
will happen when a community splits.
Going along with the previous example,
a closely working group in a company may
at some point create their own product and
form a new company with very
little ties to the old company.
One standard symptom of a group splitting
is that the nodes in the subgroup
show an increase in the number of
edges just amongst themselves.